T1W5                                                                                                     Sue Lee
Timed Writing
Should the Muslim full face veil be banned in schools, public buildings or society in general?

     Whether the Muslim full face veil, the burqa, should be banned in public domain has been a long feuded debate. The topic usually boils down to a never-ending dispute between human rights and security issues. This essay will argue in favour of banning full face veils in public domains, and on top of that draw a clear line between personal freedom and national security. It will examine public security and open justice, religious right and social cohesion, and the rights of the majority population to adhere to their culture in the following paragraphs.

     The burqa should be banned in the public realm because of public security and open justice. Several bans have already took place in Europe. In France, Belgium, Bulgaria, the Netherlands and the German region of Bavaria, the use of clothing that fully or partially covers the face is prohibited in public domains. (Sharman, 2018). The most common argument that supports the veil is that being able to choose what you wear is a part of human right, and these rights should only be limited in the interests of public safety or public order (Hammarberg, 2010). However, in the case of the “burqa ban”, it is a matter of public safety and public order. The full face veil gets in the way of an institution’s ability to enforce basic standards of security since it obscures the identity of the person beneath it (Philips, 2013). It is most likely that these bans took place due to terrorist attacks, Sims (2016) analysed as France outlawed full face veils and full-body swimsuits in certain areas after terror attacks in France, including the murder of a Catholic priest in Normandy and an attack where 85 people were killed in Nice. The mayor of Cannes, David Lisnard, believes that showing religious affiliation could create risk to public order as France is the target of terrorist attacks (ibid). Denmark’s justice minister said that the police must use “common sense” in enforcing the law after its ban on face coverings (Sharman, 2018) while Philip Hollobone said “wearing the burqa is like having a paper bag over your head” (Pidd, 2010). It also contradicts the principle of open justice when the defendant is unidentifiable. It is vital in court to be able to see the expressions of those involved so that the judge can decide whether they are telling the truth, claims Judge Peter Murphy. No one has a human right to hide from or interfere with the course of justice behind a veil, Phillips (2013) concluded. 

     The banning of burqa ensures a more coherent society and unlike what most people believes, it is not a challenge nor restriction to the Islamic community and the Muslim religion. It is often claimed that the enforcing a ban is racist, Islamophobic, ‘demonising the Muslim community’ and fuelled by religious intolerance (the UN, Hanotin cited in Chrisafis, 2016; Lord Ahmed cited in Aaronovitch, 2006). However, wearing the “burqa” and the “niqab” has little to do with religion, but rather the economic and political situation. It is inaccurate to categorize the debate within the realm of religious freedom as neither of the clothing are a compulsory practice in Islam, but rather a minority interpretation of religion. (Silvestri, 2010). Muslim anti-Islamist campaigner Maajid Nawaz also wrote that it cannot be racist or Islamophobic to ask someone to show their face as only a minority of the Muslim community believes that as a religious duty(cited in Phillips, 2013). In fact, the stress of the ban is not on burqa to begin with, but in all clothing that imposes danger by covering the entire face. Both Belgium and Italy bans clothing that obscures the identity or prevents immediate identification of the wearer in public areas. (Walker, 2010). Moreover, it can be stated that the visibility of full veiling in Europe is a sign of failure of integration (Silvestri, 2010). France, as one of the countries that has a burqa ban, believes that the cohesion of society can only be maintained when a secular public sphere overcomes religion, which belongs to the private sphere. (Silvestri, 2010). Rod Liddle believes that home-based Islam was an existential threat to the country (cited in Aaronovitch, 2006). Even Shaista Gohir, who is in support of the veil, admits that wearing a face veil has a negative effect on community cohesion and the majority of Muslims do not believe it is a religious obligation. (Pidd, 2010). 

     It is essential to ban the burqa in the public realm as it is a challenge to the culture of the majority population. Hammarberg (2010) argues that such a ban is alien to European values, and that multicultural dialogue should be promoted while Hollobone argues that it is “not the British way” for Muslim women to cover their faces in public. Hollobone believes that people can only engage in interactive dialogues in a community by seeing each other’s face, and that by rejecting a show of their faces, “these people are saying that they don’t want to be part of our way of society.” (cited in Pidd, 2010) Philps (2013) thinks that for women to cover their faces in interaction destroys the presumption of equality because while others cannot see her face, she can see theirs. As a result, the woman has a advantage over others and that it defies the fundamental characteristics of society that faces are visible. Sarler (2010) agrees to that by claiming it is only fair that if she were to consider Muslim women’s protocol for them to consider hers back. “What about my right to see who I’m talking to?” she questions. For a foreigner to survive in a different country, it is only fair that various compromises be met accordingly to the country’s original culture and value. Philips (2013) supports that by claiming the rule of a liberal society is that minority customs should only be tolerated if it does not interfere with the values of the majority. The supports of the veil has turned common sense into a prohibited activity and it would ultimately destroy western society, he concluded. 

     In conclusion, the burqa should be banned in public domain because it is a threat to public security and justice, the cohesion of society, and original western values. It has caused problems in terrorism and the judiciary system in the past, and it should not be allowed in the public realm for the sake of the right of safety of the majority of the population. Some say that the veil empowers women, however it creates fear among people. It is unfair to disregard the right of the large majority group’s sense of safety for the feeling of empowerment of a minority group. The burqa has also caused tensions and divisions in various countries. The divisions created fear and conflict amongst people, including incidents where members of the Muslim communities were attacked, for example a woman on Merseyside having her veil snatched from her and a Galsgow imam who was assaulted. (Aaroncitch, 2006). It is also known that post 911, the pressure on Muslim women is to not wear Islamic dress, out of fear for their personal safety (Yaqoob, 2006). The ban of the burqa not only resolves the fear of the public community, but also helps protect these people from being attacked by extremist as it is difficult to have a sense of division when groups have no specific characteristics to show their differences. 

