Student name: Steven Wang
ICC No: 600001
Term: 2 (2018/19)
Course Title: Understanding the Modern World

Title of assignment question:
How significant are cultural differences in shaping international relations between societies in the modern world? Illustrate your answer with specific examples.


Lecturer’s name: Dr Keith Martin
Word Count: 2179



In the modern world, international relations usually refer to the sum of all kinds of social relations across national boundaries, that is, competition, conflicts and cooperation between countries and international organisations in political, economic, military, cultural and other aspects (Wendt, 1987). Among them, varying degrees of the importance of different influencing factors have aroused extensive discussion (East and Gregg, 1967). This essay aims to demonstrate that cultural differences do affect the development of modern international relations to a certain extent, but economic factors are the most decisive and fundamental elements in the process of constructing the international relations between societies. The whole content will be divided into two parts. The first part will focus on the conflict between radical Islamic civilisation and Western civilisation in order to introduce the rationality of Huntington's theory of ‘Clash of Civilisations’, and then elaborate on three one-sided blunders of this viewpoint. The second part will demonstrate that compared to ‘culture’, economic factors are playing a far more important role in international affairs of both the Cold War and the Post-Cold War world.

First of all, cultural differences have indeed influenced the international relations of the modern world to a great extent. In the early 1990s, American scholar Samuel Huntington published the Clash of Civilisations?, which proposed that the world after the end of the Cold War, is neither a ‘joyful and harmonious’ world in Francis Fukuyama's "the End of History" which denies the role of ideology (1992), nor a simple dualistic world of rich and poor or north and south (Falk, 1998); it is claimed to be a multipolar and multicultural world that contains seven or eight civilisations (Huntington, 1993). He established a paradigm on cultural differences to analyse global politics and the world order, emphasising that civilisation and ethnic identity would be quite important in future events, and that the conflict between hegemony and anti-hegemony caused by different religious beliefs and cultural traditions will become increasingly acute (ibid). Moreover, Huntington believes that the major divisions of humanity and the main sources of conflict would come from civilisational communities, and the fault zone between them would build the epicenter of conflicts in global politics (i.e. fault line wars) (Huntington, 1996).

The end of the Cold War has led to a trend of anti-globalisation, known as a sentiment of ‘exclusive rebellion’; and it re-emphasises the identity of races, communities and legitimate rights, namely with ‘identity politics’, ‘recognise politics’ and ‘multiculturalism’ (Hale, 2002). According to Huntington (1993), religion is an extremely significant part of the concept of ‘culture’ and it can be linked to the shaping of state and non-state actors in international relations by the function of group construction of religious identity. Religions or sects can also form cross-border religious groups or international religious organisations, thus exerting great influence on international affairs. 

Whether it is the ethnic-religious identity of a sub-nation or the pan-religious identity of a supranational, both of them might erode and dissolve national sovereignties, and are reflected as very prominent factors in the wave of national separatism after the Cold War (Duderija, 2008). Another great issue that affects national identity via religions is the exclusion of modernisation from religious revivals, which in turn leads to the challenge of secularisation or secular nationalism from ‘religious fundamentalism’ and ‘religious nationalism’ (Kinnvall, 2004). Among them, Islamic civilisation is one of the main challenges of Western civilisation that Huntington pays close attention to. By examining the 1400-year history of the establishment and expansion of Islam since the 7th century, he finds that the conflict between Islamic civilisation and Western civilisation has been continuous and never ceased, and the contradiction in the nature of Islam and Christianity and the civilisations based on it are regarded as the root cause of this conflict (Huntington, 1996). Various radical religious fundamentalists, such as the Taliban regime in Afghanistan and the Al Qaeda, the Islamic group in Southeast Asian countries, are notorious for international terrorism (Halliday, 1996 & Stern, 2003). To some extent, the terrorist attacks represented by the September 11 incident of the United States in 2001 could highlight and confirm the international conflict between these two civilisations (Huntington, 1993).

Although some scholars argue that the ‘911’ incident should be considered as a conflict between civilisation and barbarism, a conscious contest of civilisation and anti-civilisation, which means being characterised as a challenge to the modernity (Tuastad, 2003). Nevertheless, it is actually a faulty assumption since Eagleton (2009) points out that barbarism embodies the dark side of modernity, and terrorism is only one of its extreme forms. Besides, Juergensmeyer (1993) also asserts that the ‘911’ incident is ‘a nerve that touches the depths of religion in the secular society’. In essence, the idea that the American civilisation consistently believes in and promotes universal values has impacted the Islamic civilisation; thus, these extreme conflicts might jeopardise peace and stability in the international community. In addition, according to the US Peace Research Institute, in 1999 alone, there have been 95 incidents of religious and ethnic violence in the world, including more than 20 major ones (Ellingsen, 2000).

However, in fact, the conflicts of identity between civilisations are quantitatively far fewer than that within civilisations (Senghaas, 2005). The Islamic world is a mixture of many countries or organisations with different ideologies and social systems, which has a diversity that has been seriously neglected by the Western world. In Central Asia, there are more clashes inside Islamic societies than with Western civilisations. For example, Iran and Turkey have launched fierce competitions (Ayman, 2014). Similarly, behind the Iran-Iraq war, the Arabs in Iraq and Persians in Iran are both Muslim, but they belonged to different denomination: Sunnis and Shias (Karsh, 1990). Ethnic differences, religious differences and disputes have become important reasons for the emergence and development of the confrontation, yet it still falls within the scope of the internal conflict of Islamic civilisation. Moreover, the Islamic world should not be simplistically seen as a monolithic entity, as Huntington suggests, since the union of different civilisations veritably exists. For instance, after Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait in 1990, many Islamic countries, in disregard of the Muslim Brotherhood, took joint actions against Iraq and participated in multinational peacekeeping forces organised by the United States and other western countries (Warbrick, 1991), which are inconsistent with Huntington’s theory of the Clash of Civilisations.

Another view is equally opposed to regarding civilisation and culture as the basic driving force for international relations because it tends to underestimate the deepening and differentiation of the tide of globalisation. Huntington (1996) believes that religious revivals are able to transcend international boundaries, sometimes even spreading wildly in extreme versions of Islamic fundamentalism. Beyond his ideas of Islam and China, the basic framework of Westphalia's state-centred sovereignty remains strongly preserved. In reality, however, as the American scholar Hopf (1998) puts forward: modernisation and globalisation are eliminating cultural differences, and as a driving force of international relations, the influence of culture on international relations is declining. He argues, if modern scientific, technological and economic realities do drive countries to choose similar institutions, and if countries can create culture, the forces for homogenisation will gradually prevail over the counterforces of culture; then many of the results attributed to cultural differences will become less obvious. Therefore, it is obviously illogical to separate ‘culture’ from many factors that influence the structure of multinational corporations and call it a crucial variable.

Furthermore, culture is not formed in the social and economic vacuum but pushed up onstage by the social and economic environment (Murshed, 2013). For example, the U.S. Middle East policy has taken advantage of the divisive nature of the Islamic world, namely, supporting pro-American Arab countries such as Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and Egypt and adopting moderate Islamic forms; to combat Iran, Libya and Iraq, which are anti-American countries with radical Islamic ideology (Little, 2008). The fact that the United States did so was not based on civilised considerations, but on economic and strategic interests in the Middle East and regional power balance interests (ibid). This view actually emphasises that “the real constructions of the international relations framework are socio-economic factors, not civilisations”, which will be the major argument in the next part.

Compared with cultural differences, economic factors play a more important, fundamental and decisive role in international relations between societies. With the development of scientific and technological revolution, human society has transformed from mechanisation to the automation era controlled by electronic computers, which indicates that the scale, speed and labour productivity of social productive forces have all explored to a new historical height. Moreover, with social integration of production specialisation and collaboration between countries, transnational corporations have been generally developed in contemporary capitalist societies. For instance, by 1977 alone, U.S. multinationals had 24,700 overseas branches with assets of $830bn (US Department of Commerce; cited in Cho, 1990). The development of these international companies and regional economic integration organisations, international economic regulation institutions has greatly promoted the internationalisation of capital and production, which has gradually deepened the interdependence of various forms of the world economy (Tan & Pan, 1997). Hence, international economic relations have become a powerful part of the entire international relations, and its role as a tool to achieve political goals is growing (ibid).

Realists have often valued the influence of economic factors on contemporary international relations seriously; under this circumstance, the theory of economic politics emerged and spread widely. U.S. senator Abraham Ribikov (1971) stressed that in the last quarter of this century, economic politics will replace geopolitics as the main driving force in international affairs. Likewise, Japanese scholar Sanhaoshu claims that economic politics is a concept opposed to geopolitics (Le Billon, 2004); because geopolitical expansion mainly relies on weapons and military forces, while economic politics advocates development through the provision of goods, machinery, equipment, management technology, scientific technology and capital. Economic factors are generally not as obvious as military forces which can achieve certain political purposes in a relatively short time, but practically, they have constructive characteristics (ibid). Furthermore, French historian Jean-Baptiste DiRochanel (1983) also emphasised that since WW2, trade, financial and monetary agreements between countries are ahead of true political agreements in terms of state-to-state relations; almost all genuine political treaties must be accompanied by an economic agreement. For example, the Atlantic Treaty immediately created a demand for military assistance, i.e., arms and loans were requested to be provided (ibid).

In the Cold War between the U.S. and USSR, economic interests are the overriding goals, economic means are the prior weapons, and economic strength is the key factor; and a large number of facts show that pursuing economic interests have become the fundamental starting point of American foreign policy. In 1969, for example, the United States passed a new export control law, declaring that it wanted to expand "peaceful trade" with the Soviet Union (Waltz, 1993). After the Afghan Incident and Carter Administration imposed economic sanctions on the Soviet Union, the Reagan Administration paid more attention to the use of economic weapons especially towards USSR after 1981; which includes the following measures: (1) advocating unified economic policies of western countries; (2) restrict the transfer of cutting-edge technologies; (3) provoking a new arms race and developing economic exchanges with Eastern European countries in order to separate Soviet-Eastern relations economically; (4) intensifying competitions on worldwide energy and strategic materials (Ball, 1982). All these measures clearly illustrate that national interests are the decisive factors affecting international relations in the course of the cold war, common interests among countries are the basis of cooperation, and antagonism of interests is the root cause of national conflicts. 

After the Cold War, the influence and effect of economic factors on contemporary international relations are also extremely extensive and in-depth. The OECD report argues that by 2020, in the share of world output, developed countries will fall to 1/3, yet developing countries will rise to 2/3 (International Studies, 1998); notably, China's economic growth has attracted the world's attention. Driven by economic benefits, China strived to enter the WTO successfully in 2001 (Blancher, 2004), and the "Belt and Road" project since 2013 is a vital initiative for China to participate in the establishment of a new international economic order (Cai, 2017). These can serve as good examples to prove that economic factors are the main incentives of interaction between states and international organisations. Similarly, the EU, as an economic organisation rather than a cultural organisation, with an overall economic strength of $9.76tn in 2000, roughly the same level as the U.S., has become the second largest economic entity globally (International Studies, 2001). Correlatively, Turkey's ambition to join the EU and Britain's attempt to leave the EU are both essentially aimed at pursuing the maximum economic benefits.

To conclude, cultural differences can be regarded as one of the important factors affecting international relations; but in essence, the wealth desires of countries or international organisations stimulate their economic expansion, that is, cultural and religious economic factors are only secondary to national interests. Culture is, in a certain sense, a political and economic reflection of a particular society (Robison, 1981). Therefore, in international relations, culture as a ‘soft power’ cannot function solely, it always relies on the ‘hard power’ brought about by the development of economic factors.
Bibliography:

Ayman, S.G., 2014. Turkey and Iran: Between friendly competition and fierce rivalry. Arab Studies Quarterly, 36(1), pp.6-26.

Ball, D., 1982. ‘US Strategic Forces: How Would They Be Used?’ International Security, 7(3), pp.31-60.

Barker, J. Paul (ed) (2013) The Clash of Civilizations: Twenty Years On. Bristol: E-international relations.

Blancher, M.N.R. and Rumbaugh, M.T., 2004. China: international trade and WTO accession (No. 4-36). International Monetary Fund.

Cai, P., 2017. Understanding China’s Belt and Road Initiative.

Cho, K.R., 1990. The role of product-specific factors in intra-firm trade of US manufacturing multinational corporations. Journal of International Business Studies, 21(2), pp.319-330.

Duderija, A., 2008. Factors determining religious identity construction among Western-born Muslims: Towards a theoretical framework. Journal of Muslim Minority Affairs, 28(3), pp.371-400.

Eagleton, T., 2009. Culture & Barbarism: Metaphysics in a Time of Terrorism. Commonweal, 136(6), p.9.

East, M.A. and Gregg, P.M., 1967. Factors influencing cooperation and conflict in the international system. International Studies Quarterly, 11(3), pp.244-269.

Ellingsen, T., 2000. Colorful community or ethnic witches' brew? Multiethnicity and domestic conflict during and after the cold war. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 44(2), pp.228-249.

Falk, R., 1998. Global civil society: Perspectives, initiatives, movements. Oxford Development Studies, 26(1), pp.99-110.

Hale, C.R., 2002. Does multiculturalism menace? Governance, cultural rights and the politics of identity in Guatemala. Journal of latin american studies, 34(3), pp.485-524.

Halliday, F. 1996 Islam and the Myth of Confrontation: Religion and Politics in the Middle East. I.B. Tauris

Heywood, Andrew (2011) `Identity, Culture and Challenges to the West’, ch. 8 in Heywood, Global Politics. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Hopf, T., 1998. The promise of constructivism in international relations theory. International security, 23(1), pp.171-200.

Huntington, Samuel P. (1996) The Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking of World Order. Simon & Schuster.

Juergensmeyer, M., 1993. The new Cold War?: religious nationalism confronts the secular state (Vol. 5). Univ of California Press.

Karsh, E., 1990. Geopolitical determinism: The origins of the Iran-Iraq war. Middle East Journal, 44(2), pp.256-268.

Kinnvall, C., 2004. Globalization and religious nationalism: Self, identity, and the search for ontological security. Political psychology, 25(5), pp.741-767.

Le Billon, P., 2004. The geopolitical economy of ‘resource wars’. Geopolitics, 9(1), pp.1-28.

Little, D., 2008. American orientalism: the United States and the Middle East since 1945. Univ of North Carolina Press.

Murden, Simon (2008) `Culture in world affairs’, in John Baylis, Steve Smith, and Patricia Owens (eds) The globalization of world politics: an introduction to international relations. 4th edition.

Robison, R., 1981. Culture, politics, and economy in the political history of the New Order. Indonesia, (31), pp.1-29.

Senghaas, Dieter (1998) The clash within civilizations: coming to terms with cultural conflicts. London: Routledge

Senghaas, D., 2005. The Clash within Civilisations: Coming to Terms with Cultural Conflicts. Routledge.

Stern, J., 2003, August. Terror in the Name of God. New York: Ecco.

Tan, X.M. & Pan, Z.Q., 1997.  ‘Culture and international relations: a review of basic theories’, Modern Foreign Philosophy And Social Sciences, no.4 and no.5, 1997.

Tuastad, D., 2003. Neo-Orientalism and the new barbarism thesis: aspects of symbolic violence in the Middle East conflict (s). Third World Quarterly, 24(4), pp.591-599.

Waltz, K.N., 1993. The emerging structure of international politics. International security, 18(2), pp.44-79.

Warbrick, C., 1991. III. The Invasion of Kuwait by Iraq. International & Comparative Law Quarterly, 40(2), pp.482-492.

Wendt, A.E., 1987. The agent-structure problem in international relations theory. International organization, 41(3), pp.335-370.
