Student name: Wenqi Hu

What is meant by the term ‘the fiscal-military state’? How accurately does this term describe and explain the rise of European power in the 18th century?

From the sixteen century onwards, many states in Europe developed a completely new model which is no longer confined to the resources in own country and also cooperate with external parties in state revenue and expenditure, it made the scale of the European war expanded simultaneously. With this partnership has developed quite extensive and widespread, therefore constitute what we called the fiscal-military states. Although originated in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, the fiscal-military became a feature of the eighteen century. In the context of the Atlantic, the development of an 18th-century fiscal-military nation is particularly important due to the competition between European states. It is undeniable that the colonies have had a significant impact on the nature of fiscal-military states. The power of European is not only expanded in the Americas but also grew in Africa, South Asia, and Southeast Asia for the slave trade and far east trades. This assignment will concentrate on two main aspects. Firstly, the meaning of the fiscal-military state from components. Secondly, the rise of European power in the eighteen century is due to the external impact on the European economy by forced and focus on the British East India Company in India especially. 

Literally, the fiscal-military states simple divided into two components and understood as states that use taxes and national fiscal policies to sustain large-scale wars. In fact, the formation of the fiscal-military is much more than that. Wilson propose that defined the fiscal-military states from four main elements. First of all, the actors which be as supplier and consumer at the same time. The actors are usually stated obviously, but also should include states with partial sovereignty, semi-sovereign polities, and non-states actors. For example, the states that vanished without won the war, banker, contractor, and entrepreneurs in all walks of life. Secondly, the hubs as centers of the fiscal-military states which are not necessarily the political centers of sovereign states but is decision-making place with specific industry experts then developed into a huge net of operations and contact multiple other hubs of fiscal-military states. The communication method between hubs should not be ignored because the development of information dissemination reached its climax with the emergence of fiscal-military states. Manpower, finance, and material resources are exchanged and transported by traffic postal network for the fiscal-military hubs. Tertiary, complex communications rely on fiscal-military instruments which are included deeds with mutual recognition such as conscription contract, credit voucher, and financial assistance treaty, for instance the Anglo-Sardinian Subsidy Treaty in 1815 which was a instrument for transfer or employ well-trained army. Although it is impossible for the armed forces of all countries to completely replace each other, but allowed state to hire non-own state formed military forces. Culture is the fourth essential factor of the fiscal-military states and has a vital affect which solved the problem of difference. For instance, geographical and spatial differences, differences in politics and status, and religious differences. Later, also known as diplomacy what we call now.
The conceptualization of the fiscal-military state proposed by John Brewer in 1989, as Brewer (1989) states, after the glorious revolution of 1688, Britain became the most capable nation in the war in Europe, because British mobilization ability of absorb the country's manpower and material resources surpassing Prussia, France and so forth all of which are often regarded as most powerful European military countries. This is based on the establishment of parliamentary oversight which is endowed Britain with the greater legitimacy of local taxes while reducing public defiance and other conflicts that may affect the tax effect. One of the most popular arguments in favour of the fiscal-military states is that researcher's vision should be extended beyond the states. Because the large quantity of non-states actors which are indispensable roles in the discussion influenced the situation at the time. Some scholars questioned the concept from John Brewer that overemphasized states' independence. Non-state actors played a certain role in the war, on the other hand, the war did promote the development of sovereign states and is a way for the state to safeguard its sovereignty. This may be a noble idea but it ignores the facts that global mixed environment while fiscal-military states created, only a few strong independent, self-sufficient individuals in Europe, cooperation relationships are more common.

One argument regarding extending access to European power advanced in eighteen century by the military. After Columbus accidentally discovered America, a large number of European settlers came to the Americas and violently attacked on Native Americans deprived of wealth which not originally owned by Europe then began the European colonization of the Americas. The notorious slave trade also peaked in the eighteenth century, the American plantation economy is based on slave labor. Seventy percent of the slaves were used to produce sugar, the rest were employed harvesting coffee, cotton, and tobacco, and in mining with subjected to cruel routines. Ponting (2000,510) contends that Until 1750 the demand for sugar surpassed food and became the most valuable commodity in Europe, accounting for one-fifth of the total European imports. Thereupon, Europeans gain wealth in the triangular trade by the land had been grabbed from Natives and cheap labor from Africa.
However, there has an objection that some scholars believe the rise of Europa because the Industrial Revolution which transited to new manufacturing processes from about 1760. The scale of industries, steam technology, new inventions in iron manufacturing, development of factories and transport all of which were changed by the Industrial Revolution, therefore, according to (1985,193), “Estimates of national income have increased in the early eighteenth century...In 1831 cotton was 66 percent of its 1770 price whilst building price levels were at 178 percent of 1770.”
This may be true though part of the industrial revolution is also based on the agricultural profits of the Americas such as the steam engine invented by James Watt was financed by Caribbean plantation owners. European admittedly plundered multitudinous wealth from other states, one of the most famous predatory tools in 18th century is the Britain East India company which established with 15 years of eastern trade patent in 1600, after the British defeated the Portuguese fleet near the east coast of India that showed the British military strength thus made Mughal emperor granted trading privileges to British merchants. Slatyer (2014) contents that King Charles II of England gave the East Indian Company a series of rights such as territorial acquisitions, coinage power, to command fortresses and troops and so forth, since then the British East Indian Company has become an independent autonomous government in India with armed, tax-funded and has legislation right in 1670. Cui (2010, 233) suggests that Dawla, the Nawab of Bengal was dissatisfied with the unauthorized expansion of the East Indian Company in 1756, he dispatched troops to attack the British strongholds in Calcutta with France's support which triggered the war but French Indian coalition failed in the Battle of Plassey, as result, the East India company took over the control of Bengal in 1764 by military which is the only one company has complete dominate of a region in the world since ancient times to today. As Deen (2014, 48) states, “the EIC imposed heavy agricultural tax of one-third of a notional produce, irrespective of what was actually produced and irrespective of bad years or droughts. Tax collection was rigorously enforced...the objective of the EIC was to collect as much tax as possible to send it to London as the company profit for the shared-holders.” under the British East India company high taxes ruled. According to Indian economist's statistics from 1757 to 1780, British plundered goods and gold and silver from Bengal could reach 38 million pounds and Deen (2014, 47) “Each of the successive rulers was required to pay a huge sum to the East India Company for its support. The amount was so high that the rulers could not pay without imposing punitive additional taxes on the people. It is said that all gold, silver and other jewelleries from Bengal were sent to London as EIC profit, thus devouring any savings for rainy days that the Bengalis had. ”

To conclude, this assignment has contended that, overall, the definition of fiscal-military state and the rise of European power in the eighteenth century owing to financial and military integration. This assignment narrates fiscal-military states from four components which are actors, hubs with communication technology, contractual form Instrument and cultural diplomacy. Put forward an argument that fiscal military state may be to relax the vision beyond the state because it is not a simple individual, it has mickle external contact. Then, this assignment linked fiscal military state and eighteenth century Europe. One major argument in favour of European power is that European obtained numerous asset economically and militarily from triangle trade and external trade in Asia, two cases in this assignment are American plantation, the domination of Bengal by compulsory military force during the eighteenth century. Another important cause of Europe rise in the eighteenth century is that the industrial revolution promoted the development of European economy, but indeed a piece of technology development funded received from the earlier external trade.

Bibliography:
Brewer, J. (1989) The Sinews of Power: War and the English State, 1688–1783. London, Unwin Hyman

Clark, G. (2007) A Farewell to Alms: a brief economic history of the world Princeton UP

Cui, Y. (2010) Yibenshududongyingguoshi Beijing, Jinchengchubanshe

Elvin, M. (1984)Why China Failed to Create an Endogenous Industrial Capitalism: A Critique of Max Weber's Explanation’, Theory and Society, Vol. 13, No. 3, Special Issue on China, pp. 379-391.

Findlay, R. & O’Rourke, K. H. (2007), Power and Plenty: Trade, War, and the World Economy in the Second Millennium Princeton U.P.

Goldstone, J. A. (2000)‘The Rise of the West-Or Not? A Revision to Socio-Economic History’, Sociological Theory, Vol. 18, No. 2.

Hall, J. A. (1990) Powers and Liberties: The Causes and Consequences of the Rise of the West. Los Angeles, University of California. 

Jones, E. (2003) The European Miracle: Environments, Economies, and Geopolitics in the History of Europe and Asia. C.U.P.

Landes, D. (1998) Wealth and Poverty of Nations: Why Some are so Rich and Some are so Poor. New York, W.W. Norton.

Landes, D. (2006) ‘Why Europe and the West? Why Not China?’ The Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 20, No. 2.

Morris, R.J. (1985) British Economic Growth during the Industrial Revolution. Oxford, N.F.R. Crafts 

Ponting, C. (2000) World History: A New Perspective. London: Chatto & Windus

Prof. S. M. Deen (2014) A Brief History of Bengal for Diaspora Bangladeshis, North Carolina, Lulu Press, Inc.

Slatyer, W. (2014) Life/Death Rhythms of Capitalist Regimes – Debt before Dishonour: Part II Democratic Capitalism. Singapore, Partridge Publishing 

White M. (2009) The Industrial Revolution. Available at: (Accessed 16/1/2018) https://www.bl.uk/georgian-britain/articles/the-industrial-revolution

