SOAS - University of London
International Foundation Courses and English Language Studies
INTERMEDIATE CERTIFICATE COURSE






 










Student name: Siyu Zhang

ICC No: 657128
Term: Term 1
Course Title: Understanding the Modern Word
Title of assignment question:
To what extent do you agree with Michel Foucault that ‘the judges of normality are everywhere. We are in the society of the teacher-judge.’ (Foucault, M. (1991) Discipline and Punish. London, Penguin, p.304).

Lecturer’s name: Kevin Manton
Word Count: 1650

CONTENT    

Introduction      
The Conception of ‘the judge of normality’
The Changing Nature of Power
How the Power and the Humanity Work to Impose Normality
The Opponents and Challenges of Normalisation in New Era
Conclusion
Bibliographies
   


                                                        
Introduction

With the enlightenment claiming to set people free for thinking scientifically, Michel Foucault as a post-modernism thinker criticised and revealed the reality of enlightenment, which is the changing nature of power. The modern power as he quoted in Abnormal (2003) which is different from judicial power, is defined as ‘normalisation power’. This essay will explain the conception of ‘the judge of normality’ and it will then show how the power and the humanity work in the modern judgement system to impose the concept of normality. Additionally, the last part of the essay involves some scholars’ contradictive views such as liberalism and the challenges normalisation meet in the internet era.

The Conception of ‘the judge of normality’

In Foucault’s quote: ‘the judges of normality are everywhere’, the normality is defined as a stage that is established by man-made principal of modernity. In his early work, the concept about normality was mainly about mental and opposed to madness, but later in Society Must be Defended (2003), normality had a wider range since he mentioned racism. Emphasised by Foucault (1979), ‘the judge’, a system including partly dual medical and judicial, was nearly completed in nineteenth century. Meanwhile, the judge is not only about evaluating others but also about the procession of characterizing an individual, for instance penalty regime (Brookfield, 2001). One interesting example to understand this concept is Panopticon (Foucault, 2003), a special round prison designed by the Jeremy Bentham in the late 18th century, where every prisoner’s behaviour is easily detected by someone in a high central tower. The existence of Panopticon served the two meaning of ‘judge’: a) the guilty is possible to be supervised all the time; b) those who perform badly will be given a penalty until they regulate their behaviours and become ‘normal’.

The history of ‘normalisation’ starts from the bio-power that rose in 18th century Europe, such as medical treatment to psychopaths (Osborne, 1994). Afterwards, it was introduced into the prison and judicial system, and very soon used in more parts of life to orientate people. The system itself worked perfectly to regulate everyone in it to reach ‘normal’, even some kinds of normality seems abnormal nowadays such as colonisation and slavery. Take Panopticon mentioned above, the system creates a so-called ordinary individuality for everyone (Armstrong, 1994). Nevertheless, although hard to notice, when delinquents are punished and constrained by the system, those who carry out the penalties are also constrained by it
(Foucault, 2003). Moreover, people who are neither prisoners nor guards are still somehow constrained by the judge. By various disciplinary practices, the system produces ‘truth’ in social, cultural and political aspect (Dean, 2010). Or in Foucault’s words, it is a sort of homeostasis by achieving an overall equilibrium which protests the security of the whole from internal dangers (2003).

The Changing Nature of Power

In fact, in Foucault’s view, the process of normalisation reveals the changing nature of power before and after the Enlightenment, from the sovereignty power during the Middle Age (Machiavelli, 1961) to 18th or 19th century’s bio-power from lunatic asylums to colonisation (Ferro, 1997). The power anticipating in this proceeding before late 20th century is the combination of sovereignty power, state power and capital power, where state and capital power takes a considerable proportion (McGowen, 1994). When it leads to late 20th century, globalisation and speedily developed technology abruptly lift the importance of capital power (Beck, 2005). Besides, because power is hierarchical, normalisation systems have their own hierarchy (Hindess, 1996). Overall, as Dean (2010) emphasised, every type of power involved in normalisation is considered as disciplinary power, which the material and spiritual life we have today severely depends on. 

How the Power and the Humanity Work to Impose Normality

When the rules of normality become the biggest problem in the process of normalisation, power and human nature work together to make the birth of it possible. During 18th century to early 20th century, standards of normality was mainly the conceptions imposed by the powerful whether they are nobility, conquerors, or governors (Dean, 2010). Although the powerful can easily force their minds into the ordinary people, it will be much harder for coercion solely to conceive them and make the minds become kinds of normality. Actually, the transformation from standards to normality can be explained by humanity (Foucault, 2003). Firstly, it is human’s nature to promote benefits and avoid harms that realises the authority of the powerful (Holm & Bower, 1994). Numerous disciplinary practices, in which education serves as the most significant part to achieve acceptance of the standards, assist them to be effective in people’s life, such as the Catholic school education Foucault (2003) mentioned in Abnormal. Moreover, the mob mentality harnesses the behaviour and recognition of us and further increase the believers of those normality (Earls, 2007). One extreme example for this cloud be the French revolution in 1789 (ListVerse, 2013). Power seems to expand without human agency, it serves no interest but its own internal logic and finally creates modernity (McGowen, 1994). After years of imposing the standards, they become normality, and no longer belongs to the powerful but for everyone. 

Take Eugenics to illustrate this, which is very relevant to the World War I and long history colonisation of European. Defined by Galton (1883), It is a set of practices and beliefs that aims at improving human population, and a typical thinking for bio-power. He noted that human beings could at least hope to achieve eugenic improvement indirectly (Kevles, 1985). After this ideology had been put forward, it was practiced in various forms around Europe in 20th century by state power, which is a kind of excuse used by European to wipe out other races in politics and economics such as Estonia’s Eugenic society in 1920s (Felder, 2013). Additionally, the most fervent supporter of this ideology – Hitler created the most cruelty Jewish massacre in human history. After decades of imposing the idea of building better human, Eugenics as an evil science becomes a sense of normality in society. Ironically, it is considered a ‘conventional wisdom’ to make offspring better by all means. In marriage, parents against their children to marry person with family diseases; those who are well educated are giving the priority to give birth in China; discriminations between races, classes, and nations are heated. Certainly, people are not cutting Africans heads as souvenirs, but it does not mean Eugenics died in history instead it grows gentler and stronger in the modern world.

The Opponents and Challenges of Normalisation in New Era

Since Enlightenment, there is no doubt that ‘the judge of normality’ has been embodied widely through medical system, military strategy, legal system, and demography from the asylum in 18th century to Nazism in 19th century (Foucault, 2003). Meanwhile, normalisation itself has numerous advocators who believe surveillance and punish system are two pillars of modern world (Beck, 2005). 

However, not every modern ‘normality’ born after the Enlightenment is good, in reality, many of them reveal the dark heart of humanity and Enlightenment - such as Racism. Therefore, the rightness of normalisation has been increasingly questioned by sociologists, and are against by many people especially liberalists since 1970s. To begin with, born in 19th century Spain, liberalism is more and more active compared to the ‘Keynes Era’, and release a strong hostility towards the normalisation. According to the basic liberalism requirements, normalisation infringes the freedom of thought, conscience, expression and association (Quong, 2011). Instead of being dominated by power, liberalists advocate to be the author of your own life – personal autonomy. Most of them believe power is evil, and the most valued human attributes and relationships occur outside of power (McGowen, 1994). Yet, liberalism is a utopia with many inevitable flaws, and members of the relevant population cannot always be expected to have developed the thought and behaviour habits of ‘free’ and ‘independent’ people (	Hindess, 1996). Moreover, personal autonomy does not exclude the power at all, but making power more invisible. In reality, the power is everywhere just as Foucault quoted (2003).

Still, some people think the normalisation is diminishing due to the internet for its anonymity and plurality. It is argued that the anonymity broke the completeness of the surveillance system, which in Beck’s (2005) words is the foundation of the normalisation system. Meanwhile without the surveillance, repression has nowhere to run. Furthermore, the internet builds a fairly equal platform for people to speak, challenges the knowledge power, creates the conflicts of ‘self-normality’, and makes people more tolerant to ‘abnormal’ (Jones & Howard, 2004). Yet, various examples and reports have proved speaking online is not anonymous at all. Instead of hiding your inner secrets, the internet exposes you in a 24/7 spotlight stage. Different eyes online take place the traditional supervision, and leave you naked in numerous judges of normality. According to Dean (2010) conflicts in cosmopolitan states give birth to the new regime of normality, which no one is in charge of and no one can stop. Power is not diluted by the internet, development of technology, or globalisation, in the contrary these altogether make meta-power more bodiless and widen its influence (Dean, 2010). 

Conclusion

To sum up, Foucault’s works basically introduced the system of normalisation, and how it works in modern society. In his perspective, the actual issue behind the judge system is disciplinary power, which in his words an open-ended, more or less coordinated ‘cluster of relations’ (Driver, 1994). Although his theory is criticised by plenty of scholars, and comprehensive regulations of people’s behaviours are decreasing in the crush of technology and globalisation (Hindess, 1996). Actually, a more complete and comprehensive surveillance system and a more reasonable judge and punish system are now forming. Just as Foucault mentioned in his work, power has many forms and always at its most effective where it was least visible, normalisation as well will not be weakened but will grow stronger in the future (Driver, 1994).

Bibliographies

Armstrong, D. 1994. Bodies of Knowledge/Knowledge of Bodies, Jones & Porter (ed.), Reassessing Foucault: Power, Medicine and the Body, London: Routledge, pp. 17-28

Beck, U., 2005. The Cosmopolitan State: Redefining Power in Global Age. International Journal of Politics, Culture, and Society, vol.18, pp. 143-159

Brookfield, S., 2001. Unmasking Power: Foucault and Adult Learning. The Canadian Journal for the Study of Adult Education, vol.15, pp. 1-23

Dean, M. (2010) Governmentality: Power and Rule in Modern Society, 2nd ed., Los Angles, Calif. & London: Sage

Earls, M. (2007) Herd: How to Change Mass Behaviour by Harnessing Our True Nature, 1st ed., UK: Audible

Felder, B. M. 2013. Introduction: Eugenics, Sterilisation and the Racial State: The Baltic States, Russia, and the Global Eugenics Movement, Baltic Eugenics: Bio-Politics, Race and Nation in Interwar Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, Felder & Weindling (ed.), Amsterdam: Rodopi, pp. 3-5

Ferro, M. (1997) Colonization: A Global History, 1st ed., London & New York: Routledge

Foucault, M. (1979) The Carceral, Penguin (ed.), Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison, Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, pp. 293-309

Foucault, M. (2003) "Society must be defended": lectures at the Collège de France, 1st ed., London: Allen Lane

Foucault, M. (2003) Abnormal: lectures at the Collège de France, 1st ed., London: Verso 

Franco, P. (2015) Understanding Bitcoin: Cryptography, Engineering and Economics, 1st ed., UK: John Wiley & Sons

Galton, F. (1883) Inquiries into Human Faculty and Its Development, 1st ed., London: Macmillan

Hindess, B. 1996. Discipline and Cherish: Foucault on Power, Domination and Government. Discourses of Power: From Hobbes to Foucault, Hindess (ed.), UK: Blackwell, pp. 68-96

Jean, H. & John, B. (1994) Human Nature and Destiny, 1st ed., London & New York: Pinter

Jones, S. & Howard, P. N. (2004) Society Online: The Internet in Context, 1st ed., UK: Sage

Kevles, D. J. (1985) In the Name of Eugenics, 1st ed., New York: Knopf

ListVerse. 2013. Top 10 Instances of Mob Mentality. (Online) Available at: https://listverse.com/2013/07/28/top-10-instances-of-mob-mentality/. (Accessed 11 January 2018)

Machiavelli, N. (1988), The Prince, 1st ed., Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 

Mankiw, N. G. (2014), Principles of Economics, 7th ed., China: Peking University Pres

McGowen, R. 1994. Power and Humanity, or Foucault Among the Historians. Reassessing Foucault: Power, Medicine and the Body, Jones & Porter (ed.), London: Routledge, pp. 28-48

Osborne, T., 1994. On Anti-medicine and Clinical Reason. Reassessing Foucault: Power, Medicine and the Body, Jones & Porter (ed.), London: Routledge, pp. 28-48

Quong, J. (2011) Liberalism Without Perfection, 1st ed., New York: Oxford University Press


