ICC UNDERGRADUATE FOUNDATION PROGRAMME                                            


ASSIGNMENT COVER SHEET
Please complete the details below and insert this sheet at the beginning of each assignment before uploading to moodle.

Assignments should be double-spaced in Times New Roman or Arial script, unless you are otherwise advised. Do not indent to show a new paragraph. Instead leave a gap (an empty line) between paragraphs. 

Student name: Weishi Chen
ICC No: 657039
Term: 1
Course Title: Understanding the Modern World
Title of assignment question:
4) To what extent do you agree with Michel Foucault that ‘the judges of normality are everywhere. We are in the society of the teacher-judge.’ (Foucault, M. (1991) Discipline and Punish. London, Penguin, p.304).
Lecturer’s name: Dr. Kevin Manton
Word Count: 1575












The Enlightenment, in the late 17th century and 18th century, encouraged people to think by themselves using their own intelligence instead of being governed by kings and religions (Kant, 1784). However, the French postmodernist thinker Michel Foucault offers a new interpretation of the Enlightenment. He argues that the Enlightenment didn’t free people from the power of Kings and religions, rather it replaced the King’s power with a bio-power (Foucault, 1984). As for the age of absolute monarchies, the King’s power was described as the ‘right of death’, citizens were forbidden from doing certain things, otherwise the King had the right to kill people in order to defend his rule (Foucault, 1984). However, after the Enlightenment and revolutions in France and America, the form of society changed into capitalism. In that kind of modern state, citizens are treated both as individuals and as a sophisticated integration, in which individuality would be shaped in a new form and submitted to a set of very specific pattern (Foucault, 1982). And those two identities are interconnected, as the population (the collective unit) is comprised of individuals. Thus, power in the modern state is described as bio-power---‘power over life’, aiming to secure, extend and improve life. In response to citizens’ two identities, there are two main forms of bio-power: the discipline of the body and the regulation of population, and they are interconnected accordingly (Foucault, 1984). Through normalizing and optimizing the individuals, people use bio-power to improve the population. Consequently, the judges of normality based on bio-power is everywhere, as its object is every individual in the society. Moreover, Foucault also claims that bio-power co-occurs with bio-knowledge---knowledge about people, because people cannot normalize others without knowing the inside of their mind, soul, and innermost secrets (Foucault, 1982). Thus, people who have knowledge---the teacher, are judges of normality in the modern state. This essay will argue that to a large extent, Foucault was right when he said that “the judges of normality are everywhere. We are in the society of teacher-judge”, since the judges of normality depending on bio-power is everywhere, and power to judge belongs to teachers who have knowledge about people.

The first part of the essay will argue that in the modern society, the judges of normality is based on bio-power. During the age of absolute monarchies, the king was the embodiment of the state, and thus any harm to the state was thought as harm to the king directly. In that facet, the King’s power was explained as the ‘right to death’, he could protect himself by killing those who broke the laws (Foucault, 1984). For instance, in Foucault’s book Discipline and punish, he discoursed the cruel public execution in 1757. Because of regicide, Damiens was burnt with Sulphur, and quartered by six horses (Foucault, 1975). However, under the influence of the Enlightenment, people built up the consciousness of liberty and equality. Furthermore, they reconstructed a modern state, in which the Kings were no longer the embodiment of the state, bio-power belonged to every citizen. Moreover, the purpose of exercising power changed from defending the king’s rule to improving the population. Thus, bio-power was used to regulate the population on a statistical level, such as demography, wealth analysis and ideology (Foucault, 1984). However, regulation of the population has to be acted on individuals who constitute the population. Therefore, people, such as teachers, doctors and government officers, use bio-power to discipline individuals, to make them normal, through the military and education for instance. Furthermore, that kind of discipline is enforced in the name of regulating the population. For example, each individual child needs to be educated in order to improve the educational level of the population. 

In order to elaborate the way bio-power works to make people more normal, Foucault used the Panopticon model that was invented by the British thinker Jeremy Bentham. The Panopticon is built in a big circle of cells, in the middle of circle is a tower where the guard can observe all the prisoners, whereas prisoners don’t know whether they are being observed (Bentham, 1995). The guard has bio-knowledge over the prisoners, so that he has bio-power over them---to judge if they are normal and punish those who are abnormal. In this way, the prisoners will change their own behaviour and make themselves more normal. Therefore, the Panopticon needs bio-power in order to work, the judges of normality is based on bio-power. 

Having that the judges of normality is based on bio-power, the second part will contend that bio-power is everywhere, since bio-power doesn’t have a centre, it’s like blood capillaries in the society, and the exercise of bio-power doesn’t have an end. As mentioned previously, in the modern society, power is different from the King’s power, which is from top to bottom, from centre to margin, based on repression, envelopment and force---right to death. However, Foucault claims that the object of bio-power is every individual who constitutes the state. It is produced by different relations, such as teacher and student, doctor and patient, based on knowledge about people. The Panopticon system doesn’t only exist in the prison, it exists everywhere. There is a network of Panopticons: schools, factories, hospitals and militaries for instance (Foucault, 1975). Take the army as an example, soldiers join in the army in order to secure a better way of life for the entire population---to improve the population. In the army, the military officers have bio-knowledge about soldiers---their behaviour and their health condition, so that they have bio-power---to punish them if they are abnormal. In that case, soldiers join in the army in order to make themselves more normal, and to improve the entire population. In addition, the same thing happens in schools, hospitals and factories. Thus, power is relative and reproduceable. Everywhere in society, there are relations between different people, so that power is everywhere. Moreover, people both judge others and are judged by others, because the relationships between people is mutual. Here, the concept of power according to Foucault is different from Marx. Marx defined power as being based on economic terms. He claims that the bourgeoisies, people who own means of production---labour, land, capital and entrepreneurship, have power over the proletariats, people who only own their labour (Marx, 1849). Thus, power for Marxians is based on material conditions. However, for Foucault, bio-power is based on ideology and followed by disciplinary actions. Furthermore, the exercise of bio-power to make people more normal is never ending, as the standard of normal is improving, there is always someone who is abnormal. Abnormal is not absolute, but relative. Thus, the exercise of bio-power is everywhere at any time. Consequently, the judges of normality are everywhere.

Having shown that judges of normality, based on bio-power, exists in all aspects on the modern society, attention will now turn to the logical consequence of this: that we are in the society of the teacher-judge. Here, teacher means people who have knowledge over others, and use their knowledge-power to compel others to be normal. As mentioned before, there is no such thing as pure knowledge about people or pure power over people, what people have is knowledge-power---all knowledge about people is giving someone power over those people, and all power needs knowledge in order to work (Foucault, 1975). Therefore, bio-power is based on bio-knowledge---knowledge over the population, and bio-power is also an inevitable consequence of bio-knowledge. Furthermore, knowledge belongs to teachers---people who have power over others. For example, in modern courts, during the interrogation, the judges will take people’s soul, thoughts and desires into consideration, which brings psychology into crime judges. In that case, psychologists become the judge and have bio-power because they have bio-knowledge over people. Moreover, the judges of teachers are widely acknowledged by the society, because people are shaped by bio-power, they are made to be normal by themselves. A famous example could be the education in the US and USSR during the Cold War. Those two countries had a very different standard of normal, and were both accepted by their citizens. Because the knowledge they had about the population was different, and they used bio-power to let their citizens accept that knowledge. Therefore, the bio-power to judge normality belongs to teachers---people who have bio-knowledge over the population, we are in the society of the teacher-judge.

In conclusion, I, to a large extent, agree with Foucault that ‘the judges of normality are everywhere. We are in the society of the teacher-judge.’ Because power in the modern world is bio-power---power to extend and improve life. People use bio-power to regulate the population through discipline every individual in the society, and the consequence is to make people more normal. Based on the network of the Panopticon in the society, bio-power exists in every aspect of people’s life. Consequently, the judges of normality are everywhere. Moreover, there is no pure power or pure knowledge. Bio-power needs knowledge about people in order to discipline them, and all knowledge about people is giving someone power over others. Thus, bio-power belongs to those who have knowledge about the population---the teachers. Therefore, we are in the society of the teacher-judge. However, in the age of globalization, the traditional states are becoming cosmopolitan states, and thus power in the global age needs to be redefined (Beck, 2005). Further studies need to be done on the social political and economic relations in global times.























Bibliography:

Beck, U. (2006) ‘The Cosmopolitan State: Redefining Power in the Global Age’ International Journal of Politics, Culture and Society 18 (3/4): 143-159

Bentham, J. (1995) Panopticon or the Inspection-house [online] London: Verso.
http://www.ics.uci.edu/~djp3/classes/2012_01_INF241/papers/PANOPTICON.pdf [Accessed 29th December 2017]

Foucault, M. (1980) Power/Knowledge: Selected Interviews and Other Writings, 1972-1977 New York: Pantheon.

Foucault, M. (1982) ‘The Subject of Power’ Critical Inquiry 8/4: 777-795

Foucault, M. (1986) The History of Sexuality Harmondsworth: Viking

Foucault, M. (1991) Discipline and Punish London: Penguin.

Kant, I. (1784) An Answer to the Question: “What is Enlightenment?” [online] Konigsberg. 
http://www.library.standrews-de.org/lists/CourseGuides/religion/rs-vi/oppressed/kant_what_is_enlightenment.pdf [Accessed 30th December 2017]

Marx, K. (1847) Wage Labour and Capital [online] German: Neue Rheinische Zeitung
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1847/wage-labour/index.htm [Accessed 28th December 2017]
