Student name: Yutong Ye
(underline family name) 

ICC No:
657530

Term (1,2 or 3):
2
Course Title:

ICC
 Undergraduate Foundation 
Programme


Title of assignment question (you should copy this from the assignment question sheet):
What social, political and intellectual developments give rise to modern `race thinking’ in Europe and North America in the 18th and 19th centuries?


Lecturer’s name:

Dr. Kevin Manton

Word Count:

1638
Developments that gave rise to modern racial thinking and the queries it encountered.
‘Race’ is seen as one of the most sensitive terms since it first came up in the eighteenth century. The cause of modern racial thinking is a controversial subject as well. As Richard J. Perry (2007) stated that the footstone of modern racial thinking was provided by ‘the Enlightenment’, but ironically the Enlightenment also endorsed idea of equality. This assignment will first introduce about the fundamental ideas and four representative developments, including biopolitics, Eugenics with Social Darwinism, colonialism and imperialism, which gave rise to modern racial thinking. And two challenges appear respectively during and after the form of modern racial thinking.   
To begin with, what is the definition of ‘race’ and what is modern racial thinking. In fact, different scholars can have different opinions on them. Race may have neutral definitions as Michael Banton (1988) in Frank Dikötter (2008) comment that ‘race’ in English, is used to refer to groups of people for their alleged biological differences. But can also have definition with strong tendency as Ian Tattersall and Rob DeSalle in their book (2011) described ‘race’ as the most emotive word in the language and expressed the worst atrocities one could ever done on the other. In modern racial thinking, ‘race’ was used to legitimize the relationship between identities and communities and placed the modern world with a dangerous foundation. Most importantly, race thinking in modernity applied the biological characters to brought the relationship together. (Vial, 2016)  
The recognition of race started from the Enlightenment and the root of race and racial thinking can be traced back to the development of biopolitics. Richard J. Perry (2007) referred the Enlightenment as an epoch that provided the ground of science thinking. The trend of developing secular scientific thinking induced the exploration of the human biological character. According to Foucault and Ewald (2003), biopolitics emerged at the end of the eighteenth century with the purpose of improving the whole population. It is adopted by the first function of racism, which is to separate one population into groups or into subspecies known as races. The second function of racism is also compatible with the operation of biopolitics. That is the elimination of the inferior species will be helpful for oneself to proliferate to be a better species. Thus, emergence of modern racial thinking reflected clearly on the function of biopolitics.

The two applications of biopolitics has brought another series of ‘scientific thinking’ which led to the proposal of ‘eugenics’ and ‘Social Darwinism’. Both were inspired by the publication of “The Origins of Species” in 1859 by Charles Darwin. The book had given the scientific legitimacy of the social and political ideas underpin the racial superiority and inferiority. Francis Galton (1904) first developed ‘Eugenics’ and described it as a science that manages with the ways to improve the innate quality of a race and make it a superior race than other races, where Herbert Spender in Iain Stewart (2011) applied Darwin’s “the law of life” into the “survival of the fittest” and described the concept as ‘Social Darwinism’. The racism led by these two concepts were called ‘scientific racism’, meaning the scientific thinking behind the terms were pseudo-science thinking used to rationalize racial status. The idea of eugenics was later applied by the Nazism in the 1900s, and the idea of Social Darwinism won large support as soon as it came out, for it legalized the Atlantic Slave Trade which will be further discussed (Dr. Müller-Pohl ,2014).

From here, the modern idea of race has been questioned. One typical saying is that, with the development of the society, the appearing of a new social science ideology has brought an end of modern racism. Bonilla-Silva (2006) in Clark (2015) claimed this ideology as ‘Colour-blind racism’. As stated by Martin Luther King Jr. in Ansell (2003), Colour-blind racism appears to make people judge oneself with the ‘content of their character’ instead of their appearances. In accordance with Stuart Wells (2005), who declared that with the practice of ‘Colour blind Racism’. It will instinctively inspire a non-discriminate and equal society. In this event, traditional form racial thinking established in the modern society no longer exists. 

However, this theory is doubted by scholars for the methods that used to raise ‘Colour blind Racism’ and the term itself has contained strong racial implication. As explained former in the essay that it was the scientific thinking which gave rise to the idea of race. Therefore, any theory related to science will lead to modern racism. And from the philosophical view, the definition of ‘Colour-blind Racism’ already included the term ‘racism’ and whoever claimed the existence of race but choose to ignore it is the racist itself. So, the raise of the term by white philosophers is already a reflection of denying the racial justice (Mills, 2008). In this case, the express of liberalism had push the modern racial thinking into another stage. Through this, white people in reality can accept racial privilege and the idea of equality simultaneously (Rios and Zamudio, 2006). Mills (2008) in Ranganathan (2016) therefore argues that as the dominate political worldview that endorse for equality and liberty in the modern age, racial liberalism must be re-examined for it believes that rights are colour related. And the theory which it holds must be deracialized and must across the colour line to be accepted by the majority. pushing the modern racial thinking into another stage.  

The Atlantic Slave Trade is considered to be the central component of the European colonialism. The proof of colonialism contributed to the modern race thinking can be seen by three. First is the definition. Robert Stam and Louise Spence (1983) refers it to a process when the general powers in Asia, Africa and Latin America were dominated by the powers in European and the United States. The superiority and inferiority between races is reflected in the term ‘dominated’. Second is the suggested by Robert JC Young (2015) that colonialism was used to apply the racial prejudice into the stream of thought. As the most important components of colonialism, the abolishment of the slave trade and the movement against slavery were seen as signals of shifting away from the extreme racism. (Young, 2015). The third is that the slave trade was a turning point as the differences between races embedded in people’s mind hence, and the legalization of slavery made racism institutionalized. (Dr. Müller-Pohl, 2014).

Another development in the eighteenth and nineteenth century is imperialism. How imperialism affect the form of modern race thinking can be comprehended in two ways, which is the definition of imperialism and the Europeans’ orientation to themselves in the Age of Imperialism. The essence of imperialism was to seek for homogeneous colonies constrained by the same governmental system (Young, 2015). In accordance with its definition given, many Europeans located themselves in the predominate part of the human race, and feel themselves a great moral duty to ‘civilize’ the rest of the world, as they believe that their race is superior than other races. (Poliakov, 1982). One thing needs to be state clear is that although most scholars find it difficult to address the difference between imperialism and colonialism, ‘imperialism’ actually means territories in control by one state while ‘colonialism’ means other states’ permanent settlement in one or many territories. But they do all involves the political and economic dominant over a land or race. (Painter and Jeffery, 2009) 

While colonialism and imperialism were social political developments maintain strong racial bias, liberalists suggested that the real function of these two developments have indeed significantly benefited the large parts of the world. John Stuart Mill (1859) claimed that the development non-Europeans should be significantly contributed to the practice of colonization and imperialism. Otherwise it will remain stagnated or even going backwards. This kind of view is strongly criticized by Prof. Edward Said (1935), and defined this kind of view as ‘Orientalism’. He argues that Western thinkers were highly infected by their preconceived ideas so that they could not treat other culture in equality. By and large, the practice of colonialism and imperialism was understood wrongly by the liberalists like Mill. Moreover, the way those liberalists use to explain the ‘advantage’ of these two terms was later improved to be a racial thinking as well. The theory that colonialism and imperialism as social and political developments that gave rise to modern racial thinking is undoubted.

From what is mentioned above, it may conclude as follows. The form of the modern racial thinking is a process based on the scientific thinking constructed in the epoch of Enlightenment that involved social, political and intellectual developments as essential impetus. Queries towards modern race thinking appeared during and after its formation.
The assignment exemplified three of the developments as representatives, which are biopolitics, Eugenics with Social Darwinism, colonialism and imperialism. There shows certain causal relationship between them. The development of eugenics and Social Darwinism was based on the purpose of biopolitics after it was raised as a scientific thinking during the enlightenment. Then eugenics and Social Darwinism rationalized slave trade, which was the main component of colonialism. Imperialism emerged along with colonialism, both of which contributed to the construction of modern racism. 

Another part of the assignment discussed about two queries modern racial thinking encountered. First is that, racial liberalists claim that with the development of a new social science ideology racism no longer exists. Notwithstanding, the theory liberalism holds is invalid for the theory itself is a reflection and a sublimation of racism. The second is the towards the development gave rise to racism which was proved to be undoubted. The future of racial thinking so unpredictable that one cannot be so definite about the racial thinking. As mentioned above, the meaning of modern racial thinking can alter under different times and different circumstances. It must be treated dialectically. (Myers and Williamson, 2011). 




Bibliography
 Dikötter, F. (2008). The racialization of the globe: an interactive interpretation. Ethnic and Racial Studies, [online] 31(8), pp.1478-1496. Available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01419870802208388  [Accessed 5 Jan. 2018].

Foucault, M. and Ewald, F. (2003). Society must be defended. 1st ed. London, PICADOR New York, pp.243, 245,254-258.

 GALTON, F. (1904). Eugenics: its definition, scope and aims. London: The University of Chicago Press, pp. X (1) :82.

Huang, Y. (2014). Perceptions of the Barbarian in Early Greece and China. [online] CHS Research Bulletin. Available at: http://www.chs-fellows.org/2014/03/14/perceptions-of-the-barbarian-in-early-greece-and-china/ 
[Accessed 11 Jan. 2018].

Mills, C. (2008). Racial Liberalism. PMLA, [online] 123(5), pp.1380-1397. Available at: http://havenscenter.org/files/Mills-Racial%20Liberalism.pdf 
[Accessed 20 Dec. 2017].

Mill, J. (1859). On Liberty. UK: Create Space Independent Publishing Platform, pp. 78,79 &80

Myers, K. and Williamson, P. (2001). Race talk: the perpetuation of racism through private discourse. Race and Society, 4(1), pp.3-26.

Painter, J. and Jeffrey, A. (2009). Political Geography. 2nd ed. Los Angeles/London: SAGE Publications Ltd, p.170.

Perry, R. (2007). “Race” and Racism: The Development of Modern Racism in America. 1st ed. New York: PALGRAVE MACMILLAN, pp.115-126.

Poliakov, L. (1982). Racism from the Enlightenment to the Age of Imperialism. Racism and Colonialism, 4, pp.55-64.

Ranganathan, M. (2016). Thinking with Flint: Racial Liberalism and the Roots of an American Water Tragedy. Capitalism Nature Socialism, [online] 27(3), pp.17-33. Available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10455752.2016.1206583 
[Accessed 28 Dec. 2017].

Said, E. (1978). Orientalism., the United States, Pantheon Books, pp. 7 &12

Stewart, I. (2011). Commandeering Time: The Ideological Status of Time in the Social Darwinism of Herbert Spencer. Australian Journal of Politics & History, [online] 57(3), pp.389-402. Available at: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2199707    
[Accessed 7 Jan. 2018].

Tattersall, I. and DeSalle, R. (2011). Race? Debunking a Scientific Myth. 1st ed. College Station, Tex.: Texas A&M University Press, p.11.

Vial, T. (2016). Modern religion, modern race. New York: Oxford University Press, p. Chapter 4.

Young, R. (2015). Empire, colony, postcolony. Hoboken: John Wiley & Sons Inc. pp.44-46.

Zamudio, M. and Rios, F. (2006). From Traditional to Liberal Racism: Living Racism in the Everyday. Sociological Perspectives, [online] 49(4), pp.483-501. Available at: hp://cedar.wwu.edu/education_facpubs/12 [Accessed 3 Jan. 2018].


























