Student name: Shao Xinyue
(underline family name) 
ICC No: 654667

Term (1,2 or 3): 1
Course Title:
Understanding the Modern World
Title of assignment question (you should copy this from the assignment question sheet):
‘Secularisation theory’ argues that religious institutions and beliefs become less important as societies become more modern. Discuss the arguments and counter-arguments for this claim.

Lecturer’s name:
Kevin Manton

Word Count:
1503












The “secularisation theory” is a process that religion is losing its social significance for the reason that modernization is gathering momentum. In the temporary world, there is a debate about whether secularisation is happening or not. On one hand, proponents content that it is undergoing due to rationalism, differentiation and socialization — the three core process of modernization. On the other hand, detractors contest this position as some evidences show religion belief and institution are still important inside some groups or in some areas like America and Asia. In general, this essay will support the view of secularisation by concentrating on three key points, even though the situations in some nations or groups seem to be against it.

It’s widely claimed that secularisation is taking place in the modern world. Three main evidences can be used to prove this. First of all, religious belief and practice are declining. The religious believers in Europe dropped considerably during the last 60 years, only half population of 27 European counties believe in god nowadays and 25.4% of them directly say they do not hold a religion (Crabtree, 2015). One reason for this phenomenon is rationalization. After the Enlightenment during 18th century, citizens became more rational and started believing in science rather than the god. Religion, as a form of dogma, refers to a set of things people believe without thinking about them, as a result is being replaced by scientific thoughts. Moreover, several secular ideologies like socialism, utilitarianism and positivism arose in 1800s make people realise that religion is not the solution of problems so people stop believing in god and heaven. In Weber’s view (cited in Beyers, 2013), every mysterious event can be explained logically and there is a clearly defined meaning for all empirical phenomena now due to rationalization, therefore the importance of faith has declined and religion has become obsolete. Thus, religious belief has less importance in recent years.

The second evidence is that religious institutions are no longer fundamentally crucial to the society. Because of the social structure change, a greater division of labour occurred due to industrialization. In a pre-industrial society, what’s called Gemeinschaft in German, people work in a small area, meaning that families always work side by side and individuals are tightly related to each other. Family, work and society are interconnected also, and religion is regarded as ‘social glue’ — a set of shared beliefs to link them together. To the contrast, in Gessellschaft, or modern societies, family, work, politics, economy and so forth are separate. The close relationship among individuals disappears and people are not necessary to share a common belief with one and others. According to Beasley-Murray (2017), UK has experienced a major decrease in church attendance of UK, 40%-60% of adult population attended church regularly in 1851 while under 10 percent in the present world. Sherwood (2016) also found that the figure of Sunday attendances in England fell to 760,000 and this is the first time for it to drop below 1 million. In this case, Peter Berger (1990) argues that religion doesn’t play a role as a ‘scared canopy’ — to protect the world any more. The idea of Marx (cited in Aldridge, 2000) is quite similar, he believes that “religion has no part to play in the life of a mature adult or an advanced civilization”. As a consequence, religious elements decline in social institutions leads to the secularisation.
	
The third expression for secularisation is privatization of religion. In the Middle Ages, people used to follow the laws of nature guided by god and almost all countries unified the state and the church. Until 18th century, state and political authority began to lose connection with religion for the huge conflicts religion caused. In the temporary world, religion has become people’s personal interest and life-style choice instead of a social obligation. The relationship between religion and the state does not exist anymore and government advocates toleration when facing religious problems. Locke (cited in Broers, 2009) states that government ought not to legislate on religious issues and should treat its citizens equally, the responsibility of it is “the preservation of the society, and of every person in it” in his word. Besides, in Trigg (2007) ’s opinion, the privatization of religion is a natural process of modernisation as the government must be neutral between the diverse beliefs of its citizens, and the cost of it is the irrelevance of the religion to political issues. As a result of losing some connection with the society, the influence of religious practice and institution decline gradually.

However, objectors point out this is not the case. The first criticism is that secularization should be a universal concept and religious institution and belief are still important outside Europe. Despite the fact that the proportion of people identified with a religious group drops in Europe, there emerges an increase in the statistics of other areas such as America and China. Opinion poll shows that the number of church attendances in US has kept stable at 40 percent since 1940 (Lee, 2014). Also, the 2015 survey by the Giving USA Foundation (cited in Tugend, 2016) reveals that “religious institutions are still the single biggest recipients of overall charity donations”, approximately 32% (119.3 billion) of total donations American citizens gave to charities were donated to churches, synagogues, mosques and temples. In China, there has been a religious revival since the early 1980s, religious institutions like temples ascend day by day. At the meantime, Christianity is growing in China, in 2014, the figure of Christians (100 million) is greater than the ruling Communist Party’s total membership (86.7 million) in this “religion free” land (cited in Anderlini, 2014). What’s more, the percentage of people with a religion identification is 84% worldwide, which means more than 8-in-10 people have faith all over the world (Harper, 2012). 

A further counter argument they make is that the religious pluralism is not incompatible to against secularization theory. Critics suggest the supporters of secularisation ignore the growth of cults, sects and NRMs. As “branches” of different religions, the amount of sects and cults and the number of people who belong to them went up massively after 1960s. As for Greeley and Nelson, these rises are the evidence indicates the world is “undergoing a religious revival” (cited in Chapman, 2004). People who refuse the secularisation theory also believe that religion is diverse but people might have strong sense of religious belief. Some minority groups in UK seem to hold religious belief more strongly, Northern Ireland can be an example to illustrate. People in Northern Ireland have many various religious beliefs whereas it is the most religious part of United Kingdom, with 45% of population attending church regularly. Apart from that, China is another example. The minorities in China including the Tibetans and Uyghurs, trend to be more religious in comparison with Han — the majority of China, not only in belief but also practice. Religion plays an irreplaceable role in their societies and it will continue to do so in the future. Additionally, there is a strong religious influence in their policy. Among the minorities, Tibetan Dalai Lama was always the leader of the religion and the government, meanwhile the clergy was vital both socially and politically. To the contrast, among Han, Confucianism is not that influential as much as before in the modern age (Zang, 2016).

Admittedly, the opponent arguments of secularization are possible to be true to some extent, however, the following proofs of secularisation appear to be more convictive. To begin with, critics of secularisation theory use USA and China as examples to suggest that religion does not secularised in everywhere. Nonetheless, according to a research (Newport, 2016), 89% of American people say they believe in god while the figure for that is 98% in 1967. In spite of that the fall is sight, at least it can be considered as a symbol of secularization in US. Furthermore, there is a dramatic turn down in the Catholic population of China because of urbanization and over 60 percent Chinese are atheists in 2016 (Suiky, 2016). For the increase of cults and sects, Wilson (1982) maintains that they are short-lived and the membership of them is small, therefore, they have little influence in the social world. Likewise, this point is also rejected by Bruce (2002) who states that the members of these groups are only a fraction of those who leaving the mainstream church, so they do not have a lot of power. With respect to the minorities, to Bruce (1996)’s mind, greater participation does not equal to deep religious conviction, religion is more likely to be a special function such as culture defense for minority ethnic.

In conclusion, although religion may still play a significant role in some realms at present, we cannot deny that modernization tends to weaken the power of religious beliefs and institutions as they are declining in the public and religion is becoming individuals’ own business.



Bibliography
Beasley-Murray, P. (2017) The Secret to Church Growth Isn’t Really Secret http://www.ethicsdaily.com/the-secret-to-church-growth-isnt-really-secret-cms-24047 (13 January 2018)
Sherwood, H. (2016) Church of England weekly attendance falls below 1m for first time The Guardian https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/12/church-of-england-attendance-falls-below-million-first-time (13 January 2018)
Beyers, J (2013) Obituaries and predictions: a sociological perspective on the future of religion http://www.scielo.org.za/scielo.php?script=sci_arttext&pid=S1015-87582013000100001 (13 January 2018)
Aldridge, A. (2000) Religion in the Contemporary World USA: Blackwell Publishing
Berger, P. (1990) The Sacred Canopy: Elements of a sociological theory of religion. New York NY: Random House
Trigg, R. (2007) Religion in Public Life: Must Faith Be Privatized? Oxford: Oxford University Press
Broers, A. (2009) ‘John Locke on Equality, tolerant, and the Atheist Exception’
Inquiries vol.1, no.12, pp.1-2	
Lee, B. (2014) Secularisation in America
https://www.slideshare.net/beth__/secularisation-in-america (14 January 2018)
Chapman, S. (2004) Sociology London: Letts Educational
Newport, F. (2016) Most Americans Still Believe in God
http://news.gallup.com/poll/193271/americans-believe-god.aspx (14 January 2018)
Tugend, A. (2016) Donations to Religious Institutions Fall as Value change
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/06/giving/donations-to-religious-institutions-fall-as-values-change.html (14 January 2018)
Zang, X. (2016) Handbook on Ethnic Minorities in China UK: Edward Elgar Publishing Limited
Wilson, B. R. (1982) Religion in sociological perspective Oxford: Oxford University Press
Bruce, S. (2002) God is dead: secularisation in the West Oxford; Blackwell Publishers
Anderlini, J. (2014) The rise of Christianity in China
https://www.ft.com/content/a6d2a690-6545-11e4-91b1-00144feabdc0 (16 January 2018)
Suiky, A. L. (2016) The decline of China’s Catholic population and its impact on the Church
http://www.asianews.it/news-en/The-decline-of-China’s-Catholic-population-and-its-impact-on-the-Church-38373.html (16 January 2018)
Crabtree, V. (2015) Religion in Europe
http://www.humanreligions.info/europe.html (16 January 2018)

