
ICC 2017-18
ASSIGNMENT COVER SHEET









Student name: Meixuan Lyu
ICC No: 654740
Term (1,2 or 3): 1
Course Title: Understanding the Modern World
Title of assignment question:

‘Secularisation theory’ argues that religious institutions and 

beliefs become less important as societies become more modern.

Discuss the arguments and counter-arguments for this claim.
Lecturer’s name: 
Kevin Manton
Word Count:
1354













In traditional societies, religion shaped people’s lives, the way they thought themselves, the way they understood themselves and the world around them, and the way they behaved toward others. Thus, religion is a kind of spiritual sustenance and pillar for people, they revere and awe the divine forces which they are believing and they also controlled by them. So religious beliefs and organisations are vital for people. However, with the progress and modernisation of society, secularization has emerged, which means religious organisations no longer have many political, cultural and social authorities. Although more than 80 percent of British say they believe in some deity today, most of the people do not know what they actually believe in, and they do not go to church to attend any rituals and ceremonies. This essay will argue that religious institutions and beliefs become less significant in modern societies.

One argument regarding in contrast to the secularisation, there are many places in the world where religion such as Christianity seems to be flourishing or revival under the influence of fundamentalism that promotes unswerving compliance to religious law of the whole society. According to Giddens (1989) claims that dynamic Islamic fundamentalism challenges westernization in Pakistan, Turkey, and areas of the middle east. It proved the growth of the fundamentalism. Also, the development of conservative Protestant organisations in America indicates that secularization is not appearing. It is sometimes maintained that members of these organisations are more likely than others to go to church and support traditional moral ideas powerfully. It has been noted that the majority of conservative religious organisations have grown significantly at the cost of more mainstream sects in recent years. For instance, A large number of denominations and cults flourish alongside built churches in the United States (ibid). However, this argument overlooks the fact that although they have declined the increase of secularization among their religious institutions, they cannot achieve more than this. While they are an essential political power in America, they have not obtained any necessary changes in the society and conservative politicians often far away from these institutions in order to be elected to political posts. It is clear that religious institutions have few rights because of the politics in modern societies. The government is depended on constitutions that establish the legitimacy of the state on the real world instead of by the religious beliefs. But the secularisation of Asian political departments often conceals the spirit of religion. According to Calhoun, Juergensmeyer, and VanAntwerpen (2011), the Chinese government, which is thought to be led by an atheist communist party, plays a religious role in itself. It has claimed to have the right to decide who is the real reincarnation of the Panchen Lama. It argues that they can distinguish the difference between true sects and “evil cult,” and attempt to eradicate even private belief in "evil cults" such as falun gong. Also, because of the expansion of states in 19 century, Schools, hospitals, and military which used to be run by the church have been replaced by government, the church is pushed out from public institutions by government policy in Europe (George, 1991). So the church’s role in social institutions and religious element are lost. 

The second argument around the subject of secularisation is that it is possible argued that majority of people become more religious instead of that of secular in the world. The demand for religion is greatest from lower class groups and societies because they feel insecure and always suffer life-threatening events such as famine, disease, and environmental extremes for a long time. So they need to put their spiritual sustenance on religious beliefs and institutions which they think can protect them. This phenomenon can explain why third world countries maintain religious beliefs while western counties with the prosperous economy have secularization. Besides, the increasing of global population has weakened the growth of secularisation. Among the whole community, the level of population growth in rich, secure, secular western countries is low, but the increasing population rates in poor, insecure third world countries is high. Despite the fact that western nations become more secularised, the majority of the countries is becoming more religious. For example, a third world country——Georgia whether it is in religious values or religious participation are increasing steadily between 1990-2001 (Norris and Inglehart, 2004). As a result, religious institutions and beliefs are important in modern societies. While this argument may be valid to some extent, the existential security theory cannot be used as measuring whether religious institutions and beliefs become important or not in modern societies. It is entirely believed that rise of new secular ideologies is the factor that can affect the importance of religious institutions and beliefs. According to Aldridge (2007), Karl Marx who is the representative of socialism said that religion is the opium of the masses. European working class learns from Marx that they do not have to wait for God to make their lives better. This ideology is a kind of non-religious visions of human progress and freedom. It appearance led to declining in religious beliefs and institutions.

The final argument concerning that it is sometimes believed that religion is not dying out, religious institutions and beliefs still play a significant role in modern societies. It is only being repositioned, which means people cherry-pick what they need from a wide range of beliefs and then adjust or they simply adopt a various, more private way. This is only a process that people move from traditional religions to a more personal spirit focused on themselves instead of secularisation. For example, religious institutions attendance has decreased, because it is not like an obligation in the past but a personal choice now. Hence, people have beliefs with no sense of belonging, so they do not go to church, but there are still a few professional clerics represent more people at marriages, funerals, and baptisms these ceremonies. The majority of people regard the clergy as a potential or practical assistant and help them overcome the life’s difficulties, though the low rates of church attendance, are not the attributes of the people who have lost contact with the church (Winter and Short, 1993). This may be true in some cases. However, church attendance can represent and reflect in a way as the strength of believing. If individuals do not spend their time to participate, then their religious beliefs will be weakened. It is certain that privatisation of religion is one of its effects on the secularisation. Religious institutions and beliefs have lost their political influence, because of the privatisation of religion. The demotion of religion to the private sector has also affected the role of the church as a public moral commentator. They are told to “mind its own affairs” when the religious discussion about government or business in public. For example, Budrikis (2005) claims that if the church attempts to express their ideas about homosexuality and racial discrimination by using Christian way, they will be considered as moralistic and intolerant organisations. The modern societies always want to teach people about traditional moral to decrease the crime rate without mentioning any religious institutions and beliefs.

In conclusion, religious institutions and beliefs become less significant in modern societies, since political power, rise of new secular ideologies, and privatisation of religion. However, secularisation is now questioned, because of the de-secularisation trend appearance which means the return of religion to political sphere with rights. It appears in particular countries which are outside the West in the twentieth century, such as Hindu and Buddhist nationalism in Asia, Evangelical Christianity in Africa, and Islamic fundamentalism in the Middle East and North Africa. Although there are some particular examples, most of the countries are secularisation in modern societies. Therefore, secularization is unavoidable, and it is a truly global phenomenon. In the future, religion may decline or even rapid extinction around the world, because secularisation had been happening in Europe for some time will happen all over the world. Also, secularization may become a religious belief in specific social groups and political orientations, and it is the symbol of politics and power, such as Communist China.




Bibliography:
1. Aldridge, A. (2007). Religion in the contemporary world. 2nd ed. Cambridge: Polity Press, pp.65-66.

2. Budrikis, S. (2005). Privatised Religion. [online] Members.iinet.net.au. Available at: http://members.iinet.net.au/~budrikis/StellaB/privrel.html.

3. Calhoun, C., Juergensmeyer, M. and VanAntwerpen, J. (2011). Rethinking secularism. New York: Oxford University Press Inc, pp.249-250.

4. George, M. (1991). Politics and religion in the modern world. London: Routledge.

5. Giddens, A. (1989). Sociology. 1st ed. Cambridge: Polity Press, P.477.

6. Norris, P. and Inglehart, R. (2004). Sacred and secular religion and politics worldwide. 1st ed. New York: Cambridge University Press, pp.121-122.

7. Winter, M. and Short, C. (1993). Believing and Belonging: Religion in Rural England. The British Journal of Sociology, 16, p.644.

     


