

ICC UNDERGRADUATE FOUNDATION PROGRAMME                                            


ASSIGNMENT COVER SHEET
Please complete the details below and insert this sheet at the beginning of each assignment before uploading to moodle.

Assignments should be double-spaced in Times New Roman or Arial script, unless you are otherwise advised. Do not indent to show a new paragraph. Instead leave a gap (an empty line) between paragraphs. 

Student name: HUANG QING
(underline family name) 
ICC No: 656612

Term (1,2 or 3): 1
Course Title: Understanding the Modern World

Title of assignment question (you should copy this from the assignment question sheet):
Is social inequality an unavoidable part of capitalism? Discuss critically with reference to social theory.

Lecturer’s name: Kevin Manton


Word Count: 1586






  In the capitalist world, the law of the jungle and survival of the fittest are the conventional rules of the game in society. The problem of social stratum contradictions which is stimulated by social inequality has been becoming sharper behind this money world. On the basis of the recent investigation and literature, it is inevitable that bias resides in capitalism, but capitalist system is not the immediate cause for the unequal situation. This essay will present arguments and evidence for this thesis statement, concentrating on three key aspects: Firstly, the formation of social inequality. Secondly, the reason why it is unavoidable and its limited solutions. Thirdly, the other factors including social, biological, ideological, economic, and cultural fields with analysis of multiple forms of inequalities such as racism and female discrimination.
  The society started to alter significantly under the background of industrialization and the expansion of global trade. The social division became the most remarkable feature of that modern age. With entering the stage of capitalism, a landless worker called proletariat had been obliged to be exploited by property owners to survive by selling their labor-force. The upper class who own the means of production obtained surplus profit from buying their physical power (Marx, 1867). Ultimately, 'class' was formed in the course of this process and the stratification between each level was provoked in evidence.
  
  The reason why the society governed by capitalism has the phenomenon of stratification can be explained by its characteristic. First, Peter Gran wrote in Rise of the Rich that “dividing between the rich and the poor is due to the accumulation of wealth” (2009). It is a natural and inescapable outcome for bourgeoisie as the capital and property accumulated or inherited with trade expanding century after century (Wood, 2002). Second, Capitalism with its nature of Laissez-Faire claims to pursue self-interest without government intervention (Smith, 1776), therefore resulting in limitless exploitation from capitalists. Last, to make a higher profit, capitalists create deliberately a fiercer competition, which motivates the formation of social hierarchy. 
  Although it is inexorable, there are solutions to lessen the inequality. The full form of welfare state established gradually in Twenty Century and mainly motivated by the idea that government should play an essential role in guaranteeing and improving the quality of life amongst the whole population after Second World War (Cousin, 2005). The goal of state intervention is to reduce the degree of being unequal treatment, reflected respectively in access, opportunity, and outcome that was resulting from the operation of the market economy (Saunders, 1994). Income inequality is the primary dimension existing in the modern capitalist society and nations make efforts through regulating the social wage, adjusting the income distribution, and solve the poverty issue. For instance, a state with welfare policy should subsidize the provision of healthcare, education, and housing. However, there was a surge in inequality level along with the decline in the effectiveness of welfare state owing to the aim of full employment in the late 1970s (Brown, 1995). Narrowing the gap between bourgeoisie and proletariat continues to be a challenging programme for every government so far, the employment issue, high expense burden, and the question about whether it is beneficial for the working class are both obstacle factors that states should overcome. 
  It can hardly deny that Welfare state, to some extent, has been ameliorating the situation of social inequality between classes. Nevertheless, entirely eliminating it has no possibility to be achievable, not only in the capitalist society but also can be applied to any type of regime including communism and socialism. The first reason is that the majority of arguments are restricted to the aspect of economic inequality and pass all the buck on capitalism. However, many other forms of discrimination in industrial society have no direct connection with capitalist system. To illustrate it is that gender subordination and racial inequality which ignored by Classical Social Theories and criticised by Critical Theories are hardly diminished by government policy. Family structure and gender relations changed significantly in the post-war decades, and in the transformation from traditional inequalities in patriarchy to a new one, and diminishing respects (Stearns & Chapman, 1997). At the familial level, Bradley maintained in 1996 that the unequal relationship that female subordinate to male is affected by the sexual differences, in other words, the physical and biological distinctions. Additionally, on the social sphere, job inequality was entrenched more deeply existing after industrialization and urbanization. People were obliged to leave from the domestic integration of work to pursue their individual interest with a dramatic shift from Gemeinschaft to Gesellschaft, causing thousands of male labor could no longer have the ability to raise their family alone. Married women have to work as junior labor force and nurture children in the meanwhile. Lack of congenital physical strength and higher education determined their unjust treatment and wage, and again have a negative influence on their family position. Capitalism somehow diminish inequalities in gender relations, Bayly argued that “Capitalism was beginning to adjust to the idea of women as an important group of consumers to be cultivated” (2004). On the other hand, the creation of racism is caused by ideological, economic, and cultural and biological reasons. The idea of racism and Eugenics which claimed to be based on biological fact developed in the Enlightenment form seventeenth century to the eighteenth century. To establish the bio-political normal and improve the whole population, many ethnic groups suffered from inhumane inequalities include murdering, spreading disease, and sterilization. 20,946,000 victims murdered by Nazis between 1933 and 1945 according to Rummel’s research (1992). “The motivation for racism in such accounts is economic.” Said Bottero (2005). Great immigrations driven by the global trade were enforced to maximize the profit (Olivier et al., 2007), represented by “slavery” across the Atlantic in the eighteenth century and “neo-slavery” for Indian workers, Chinese collies, and Congolese from the beginning of the nineteenth century. Migrant workers are exploited as the cheapest means of production and their status in society are under the whole hierarchy. Some scholars advocate that capitalism plays a role during this process, others argue that it should not be blamed for inequalities. James Galbraith, in 2014, contends that the wealth divide depends on the political structure and policy. As Kapur, Babu and Prasad (2014) have claimed that capitalism even can reduce the degree of inequality, one case in point is that Dalit who was at the bottom of the social pyramid in history could access to education, healthcare, and respect via acquiring the capital today. But basically, both racism reason and economic reason are based on the culture, skin and appearance difference. The consciousness of race which saw different race as different relations between groups has been formed naturally with the foundation of biological hierarchy and cultural diversity (Malik, 1996).
  
  The second reason could be explained by some examples from another world. The Soviet Union and China had once tried to achieve the highest equity in the distribution of property leading by communists. A catastrophic ending showed that the death toll in the Collectivization Period is 11,440,000 in USSR (Rummel, 1990), and the Great Leap Forward in China is around 45 million. Sharp inequalities remained continually as a result of the whole plan is made by top state officials with resource controlling while peasants and workers were proscribed from properties and human rights. Socialism is also criticized for facilitating more extreme privileges under the one-party state. Party members and officials may take advantage of their connections to dispose or overuse the scarce resource (Henderson, Mcnab & Rozsas, 2005). In this case, impersonal market competition is more fair and equitable for citizens. 
  Social stratification influenced negatively to be more distinct by other factors as well. Population growth increases social divisions in western Europe, which in turn created new antagonisms and greater diversity in social practices. Scientific revolution and industrialization had also promoted class polarization. 
  From the economic perspective, the wealth inequality is consequent in every society in the course of resources distribution, as Pareto optimality illustrated that no one can be better off without some else being worse off (Pardalos, Migdalas & Pitsoulis, 2008). From the standpoint of philosophy, what the real equity depends on different groups of people. Capitalists define equity is that everyone achieves their fortune through own efforts. On the contrary, communism distributes complete equally to have an equal society. Nonetheless, there is no existence of solutions for getting rid of this ineradicable social feature. This can be explained by Matthew of the effect which summarizes that the gap between rich and poor would be more prominent as each person chooses to expense or accumulate the advantages. Moreover, the source of unequal treatment is the difference, and everyone in this word has various types of appearances, physical condition, intelligence and so on and so forth. In other words, the only way is to obliterate this difference, so there is no doubt that it is impossible. 
  In conclusion, inequalities continued inexorably under capitalism. Similarly, it is a widespread issue under every economic system. Pursuing the equality excessively is inadvisable owing to its adverse effects. For example, there are frequently shown a rise in unemployment in countries with the high degree of equity. People should try to accept this difference sometimes so that make use of it on this account to encourage themselves. But above all, classification occurs significantly in the everyday practices of lives from Nineteenth Century and should continue to exist in the future, not only in the capitalist world but any other economic system.





















References:

Bayly, C.A. (2004) The Birth of the Modern World Oxford: Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Bottero, W. (2005) Stratification: Social Division and Inequality London: Taylor and Francis.

Bradley, H. (1996) Fractured Identities Cambridge: Polity.

Brown, J. (1995) The British Welfare State Oxford: Blackwell Publishers.

Cousin, M. (2005) European Welfare States: Comparative Perspectives London: Sage.

Galbraith, J. (2014) Policy, not capitalism, is to blame for the income divide. Opinion Global Inequality [online], 26th May 2014. https://www.ft.com/content/8eb5e942-e49d-11e3-894f-00144feabdc0 [Accessed 23th January 2017]

Gran, P. (2009) Rise of the Rich: A New View of Modern World History, Syracuse University Press.

Henderson, D.R., Mcnab, R.M. & Rozsas, T. (2005) The Hidden Inequality in Socialism 

Kapur, D., Babu, D.S. & Prasad, C.B. (2014) Defying the Odds: The Rise of Dalit Entrepreneurs Manhattan: Random House India

Malik, K. (1996) The Meaning of Race: Race, History and Culture in Western Society Basingstoke: Macmillan.

Marx, K. (1867) Das Kapital Volume I Hamburg

Olivier, Z. et al. (2007) Reliving the Past: The Worlds of Social History, University of North Carolina Press

Pardalos, P.M., Migdalas, A. & Pitsoulis, L. (2008) Pareto Optimality, Game Theory and Equilibria New York: Springer Science.

Rummel, R. J. (1992) Democide: Nazi Genocide and Mass Murder New Brunswick: Transition Publishers. 

Rummel, R.J. (1990) Lethal Politics: Soviet Genocide and Mass Murder Since 1917 New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers.

Saaunders, P. (1994) Welfare and Inequality Cambridge: The Press Syndicate of the University of Cambridge.

Smith, A. (1776) Wealth of Nations Scotland: Methuen and Co., Ltd.

Stearns, P. N. & Chapman, H. (1997) European Society in Upheaval New York: Macmillan Publishing Company.

Wood, E.M. (2002) The Origin of Capitalism London: Verso. 


